--------------------------------------------------
Alcohol Batch Record
Peach Wine 2016
--------------------------------------------------

--------------------------------------------------
6 May 2017

----------
Rack

About 10 liters of peach wine remained.
I transferred the wine by siphon, avoiding the majority of sediment.
I measured the specific gravity and pH of the wine.

Specific Gravity
0.990 at about 20 degrees Celsius
0.992 with correction for temperature

pH
3.6

The wine had a very unpleasant odor and flavor.
I disgarded about 2 liters of the wine.
I will consider disgarding the remainder of the wine.

--------------------------------------------------
19 March 2017

To the 9-10 liters of peach wine, I added 2.5 teaspoons of pectinase.
This dose was approximately double the manufacturer's recommendation.
I used a greater dose because I expect the alcohol to decrease the enzymatic activity.

----------
Ingredients

Pectinase (Pectic Enzyme): 75 units/gram, North Mountain Supply

--------------------------------------------------
17 March 2017

https://winemakermag.com/858-cellar-dwellers

While it is ideal to add pectinase (pectic enzyme) to must before crushing, pressing, and fermentation, the enzyme can be somewhat effective after fermentation.
The enzyme will be less active or effective after fermentation, so it might be necessary to add more and allow it to work for a longer duration.

--------------------------------------------------
26 February 2016

----------
Peach Wine 2016

Since wine preparation, it rested on its must in glass jars at about 13-25 degrees Celsius.
The broad range of temperature was due to the change in seasons.
The wine was still on the must in glass jars of about 2-quart volume.
The total volume of wine was about 10 liters.
Since the wine was in so many small containers, I decided to separate the wine from the must by mechanical filtration.
I washed and rinsed a pot, a colander, a cloth towel, and a glass cup.
I sterilized these by boiling water in the pot for about 10 minutes.
I strained the wine and must over the cloth and colander into the pot.
Then I squeezed wine from the must in the cloth.

I transferred the wine to plastic jugs.
The total volume of the wine was about 10 liters.
I added 0.55 grams of potassium metabisulfite to the wine.

I tasted some of the excess peach wine.
The overall taste of the wine was much gentler and less caustic or chemically than when I tasted it before.
The initial taste was very mild and had little apparent flavor or aroma of peach.
The late taste gave a pleasant reminiscence of peach.
Overall, I found the taste mild, gentle, and pleasant.

In future preparations of peach wine, I would preserve the peach juice in much greater concentration.
I would dilute the must with much less water.
I would also use a hydrometer to check the optimal amount of sugar to prepare a dry to mildly sweet table wine.
I would not cook the peaches as I did with this current batch.
Instead, I would sterilize the must with metabisulfite.
I would keep the wine on the must for a long time, maybe even as long as I did with this batch.
I understand that a lot of flavor comes from the must, and that is essential for this mild peach wine.
I would also ferment the wine at a lesser temperature to preserve color and aroma.

--------------------------------------------------
14 January 2017

The Hive Winery
1220 West Jack D Drive
Unit 2
Layton, Utah 84041
1-801-546-1997
http://www.thehivewinery.com/default.html
Jay and Lori Yahne

I visited The Hive Winery with Carolina Nobre and Alex Bigelow.
I tasted several wines.
My favorite wine was the "Pioneer Red" black currant wine.
This wine was the most like a red grape wine that The Hive Winery offered.
The dry peach wine was reminiscent of my batch of peach wine.
The sweet peach wine was too sweet for my taste.
Jay gave me a tour of the winery.
Jay recommended fermenting peach wine on the must for a long time to extract flavor from the must.
Jay also recommended using champagne yeast.

--------------------------------------------------
4 September 2016

I tasted some of the peach wine.
The taste of the wine was very caustic and chemically.
While I was able to drink it, the taste was very harsh and unpleasant.
This wine was the first alcoholic beverage I had drunk in my life.
I think that the wine was very young, and that this youth accounts in part for the unpleasant taste.

--------------------------------------------------
16 August 2016

Peach Wine

For fermentation in the longer-term, I stored the must in a place away from light at a temperature of about 20 degrees Celsius. Lesser temperature (7-15 degrees Celsius) preserves aromas from the must and allows the yeast to survive greater abundance of alcohol.

Concord Grape Wine

For fermentation in the longer-term, I stored the must in a place away from light at a temperature of about ___ degrees Celsius. Lesser temperature (7-15 degrees Celsius) preserves aromas in the must and allows the yeast to survive greater abundance of alcohol.

--------------------------------------------------
15 August 2016

Peach Wine

I allowed the peach mixture to cool to 25.5 degrees Celsius gradually over about 15 hours.

I learned that while previous rehydration in warm water increases the recovery of the dry yeast, sprinkling yeast directly on the must is less likely to introduce error.
I added 5 grams of Premier Blanc Champagne Yeast by Red Star (fresh packet, expiration date January 2019) to the surface of the peach mixture.
I added equal portions of the yeast to each container of peach mixture.
Within 3 hours of pitching the yeast on the must, rising bubbles were visible, and the surface of the must was frothy and foamy.

I wraped the lids of the jars with plastic wrap so that oxygen could not reach the wine, but carbon dioxide could still escape.

During the first 24 hours of fermentation, I kept the must at 23-27 degrees Celsius. This greater temperature (21-30 degrees Celsius) favors rapid fermentation and might be beneficial to allow the wine yeast to dominate over any contaminating species in the must. Actively rising bubbles of gas from fermentation were visible in the must.

Concord Grape Wine

I allowed the grape mixture to cool to 25.5 degrees Celsius gradually over about 15 hours.

I learned that while previous rehydration in warm water increases the recovery of the dry yeast, sprinkling yeast directly on the must is less likely to introduce error.
I added (5 grams per 15 liters) Premier Blanc Champagne Yeast by Red Star (fresh packet, expiration date January 2019) to the surface of the grape mixture.
I added equal portions of the yeast to each container of grape mixture.
Within 3 hours of pitching the yeast on the must, rising bubbles were visible, and the surface of the must was frothy and foamy.

I wraped the lids of the jars with plastic wrap so that oxygen could not reach the wine, but carbon dioxide could still escape.

During the first 24 hours of fermentation, I kept the must at 23-27 degrees Celsius. This greater temperature (21-30 degrees Celsius) favors rapid fermentation and might be beneficial to allow the wine yeast to dominate over any contaminating species in the must. Actively rising bubbles of gas from fermentation were visible in the must.

--------------------------------------------------
14 August 2016

Peach Wine

http://www.motherearthliving.com/food-and-recipes/recipes/peach-wine-recipe-ze0z1311zjhar.aspx
https://www.homebrewit.com/peach-wine-recipes/

Big red bowl is about 1 kilogram.

I started with about 2.5 kilograms (5.5 pounds) peaches.
I washed the peaches and removed bruises, other injuries, and pits.
I left the skins on the peaches.
After cleaning and removing pits, there were about 2.5 kilograms of peach flesh.
I mashed the peaches in a bowl using a potato masher.
I covered the peach must loosely with plastic wrap.
I let the peach must sit at 20 - 25 degrees Celsius for about 2 hours while I figured out subsequent steps.

I prepared 500 milliliters of Red Rooibos herbal infusion by steeping 1 tablespoons in 500 milliliters of boiling water for 5 minutes.
This infusion contributes tannin to the wine.
I squeezed the juice from 3 lemons (11 tablespoons) into the infusion.
I added 8 litres of clean water to the infusion.
I added 2 kilograms (about 10 cups) of white sugar to the water.
I let the sugar dissolve in the water.
I added the peach mash must to the sugar water.
I heated the mixture at boiling temperature for 10 minutes or more to sterilize it.
I preheated glass jars gradually by heating them in water to boiling in a pot.
I transferred the hot peach mixture to jars for primary fermentation.
I placed clean lids loosely over the peach mixture.
I allowed the peach mixture to cool to 20 - 25 degrees Celsius gradually over about 15 hours.

In this procedure, I prepared 15 liters of peach must.

...

I continued the procedure on 15 August 2016

Concord Grape Wine

http://winemaking.jackkeller.net/reques10.asp

I washed grapes.
I removed grapes from stems.
I started with 700 grams (1.5 pounds) of grapes.

I mashed the grapes in a bowl using a potato masher.
I covered the grape must loosely with plastic wrap.
I let the grape must sit at 20 - 25 degrees Celsius for about 1 hour while I figured out subsequent steps.

I prepared 125 milliliters (0.5 cup) of Red Rooibos herbal infusion by steeping 1 teaspoon in 125 milliliters of boiling water for 5 minutes.
This infusion contributes tannin to the wine.

I added 625 milliliters (2.5 cups) of clean water to the infusion.

I added 200 grams (about 1 cup) of white sugar to the water.
I let the sugar dissolve in the water.
I added the grape mash must to the sugar water.
I heated the mixture at boiling temperature for 10 minutes or more to sterilize it.
I preheated glass jars gradually by heating them in water to boiling in a pot.
I transferred the hot grape mixture to jars for primary fermentation.
I placed clean lids loosely over the grape mixture.
I allowed the grape mixture to cool to 20 - 25 degrees Celsius gradually over about 15 hours.

In this procedure, I prepared 2 liters of grape must.

...

I continued the procedure on 15 August 2016.

-----

http://winemakersacademy.com/
http://winemaking.jackkeller.net/index.asp
http://winemaking.jackkeller.net/reques10.asp
https://winemakermag.com/your-first-wine-from-fresh-grapes
http://homebrewacademy.com/how-to-make-plum-wine/
http://www.food.com/recipe/wild-grape-wine-38780
I like this recipe for Wild Grap Wine from Gramma Pat.

Wash wild grapes. Leave grapes on stems. Cover grapes and stems in just enough water to cover them. Boil wild grapes and stems until the skins on the grapes pop. Mash the grapes in the water. Strain the juice from the pulp, seeds, and stems using a strainer and cloth. Keep the juice. Discard pulp, seeds, and stems. Measure the volume of the juice. Add sugar and water in equal volumes to the volume of juice. If you have 1 gallon of juice, add 1 gallon of sugar and 1 gallon of water. That seems like a lot of sugar to me. I recommend consulting some other recipes. Add yeast (on top of a piece of bread, that is strange). Let wine ferment for multiple periods of 3 days, straining between each period. Apparently there is no need to seal the fermenting wine from the air. It is only necessary to cover loosely.

http://www.organicauthority.com/juicy-spirits/how-to-make-heavenly-homemade-fruit-wines.html

The article from "www.organicauthority.com" recommends freezing and boiling fruit instead of using Campden tablets in order to sterilize must organically. I personally like the idea of boiling for sterlization rather than using a Campden tablet. Apparently boiling can release pectin from the must and make the wine hazy, but I do not think that problem is very serious.

4 pounds ripe fruit
1 gallon water
2 pounds sugar
1 teaspoon yeast nutrient
1 package wine yeast

1 pound of sugar is about 2 cups of granulated sugar.

I wonder if I could skip the yeast nutrient. I have read about using tannin from tea. I could add a little herbal infusion to give tannin.

Here is what I think I will do.

Harvest grapes. Remove grapes from stems. Measure mass of graps. Wash grapes. Mash grapes in a clean pot. Add 1 quart of water for every 1 pound of grapes. Boil grape mash must in water for ___ minutes. Add 0.5 pound sugar for every 1 pound of grapes. Allow must to cool. Strain pulp, seeds, and skins from juice. Place juice in clean container for fermentation. Add yeast.

I wonder if I should instead allow fermentation to begin with the pulp, seeds, and skins. It seems like a lot of recipes begin fermentation on the must for some reason. Maybe the pulp, seeds, and skins contribute tannins or something. Then again, boiling the must probably releases any tannins effectively.

The purpose of boiling is to kill any wild yeast or bacteria on the fruit. Boiling is an alternative to using a Campden tablet. Neither boiling nor Campden is necessary according to traditional wine-making. It is more of a precaution. The disadvantage of boiling is that it might damage the fruit juice, or it might release materials from the must that are not desirable. An example is pectin, which makes the wine hazy.
